Step 1: Check if PIP is Already Installed
Before you install PIP on Windows, check if PIP is already installed.

Type in the following command at the command prompt:

pip help
If PIP responds, then PIP is installed. Otherwise, there will be an error saying the program could not be found.

PIP is automatically installed with Python 2.7.9+ and Python 3.4+.

PIP also comes with the virtualenv and pyvenv virtual environments.

Step 2: Verify Python Installation
As a Python utility, PIP requires an active Python installation. In newer versions of Python and Python-enabled virtual environments, PIP is already installed, and you do not need to reinstall it.

To determine whether you have Python installed:

Open the Command Prompt window.
When the console window opens, type in:
python
If this command is not unrecognized, you need to install Python before you can install PIP.

If the command is recognized, Python responds with its version and a list of commands.

When Python is installed correctly, you should see:

Python 3.7.0 (v3.7.0:1bf9cc5093, Jan 25 2019, 07:44:31) [MSC v.1914 64 bit (AMD64)] on win32
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
Installing PIP On Windows
Step 1: Download PIP get-pip.py
Before installing PIP, download the get-pip.py file: get-pip.py on pypa.io.

Download the file to the desired folder in Windows. You can save the file to any location, but remember the path so you can use it later.

Step 2: Launch Windows Command Line
PIP is a command-line program. When you install PIP, the PIP command is added to your system.

To launch the Command Prompt window:

Press Windows Key + X.
Click Run.
Type in cmd.exe and hit enter.
Alternatively, type cmd in the Windows search bar and click the “Command Prompt” icon.

Both options open the Command Prompt window. However, note that you may need to run the Command Prompt “As Administrator.” If you get an error at any point stating that you don’t have the necessary permissions to perform a task, you will need to open the app as admin.

To run the Command Prompt window “As Administrator,” right-click “Command Prompt” and then select the “Run as…” option.

Step 3: Installing PIP on Windows
Open the Command Prompt if it isn’t already open. Use the cd command followed by a folder name to navigate to the location of the get-pip.py file. This is the folder you previously used as the download location.

To install PIP type in the following:

python get-pip.py
PIP installation should start. If the file isn’t found, double-check the path to the folder where you saved the file.

You can view the contents of your current directory using the following command:

dir
The dir command returns a full listing of the contents of a directory.

Step 4: How to Check PIP Version
To check the current version of PIP, type the following command:

pip --version
This command returns the current version of the platform.

Outlet Servers Starting at Only $30.00/mo
Step 5: Verify Installation
Once you’ve installed PIP, you can test whether the installation has been successful by typing the following:

pip help
If PIP has been installed, the program runs, and you should see:

pip 18.0 from c:\users\administrator\appdata\local\programs\python\python37\lib\site-packages\pip (python 3.7)
If you receive an error, repeat the installation process.

Step 6: Configuration
In Windows, the PIP configuration file is %HOME%\pip\pip.ini.

There is also a legacy per-user configuration file. The file is located at %APPDATA%\pip\pip.ini.

You can set a custom path location for this config file using the environment variable PIP_CONFIG_FILE.

Upgrading PIP for Python on Windows
New versions of PIP are released occasionally. These versions may improve the functionality or be obligatory for security purposes.

You can upgrade PIP on Windows using the Command Prompt window.

To upgrade PIP on Windows, enter the following in the command prompt:

python -m pip install --upgrade pip
This command first uninstalls the old version of PIP and then installs the most current version of PIP.

Downgrade PIP Version
This may be necessary if a new version of PIP starts performing undesirably.

If you want to downgrade PIP to a prior version, you can do so by specifying the version.

To downgrade PIP, enter:

python -m pip install pip==18.1
You should now see the version of PIP that you specified.

Conclusion
Congratulations, you have installed PIP for Python on Windows.